---
layout: post
title: Git Refs
tags: git
comments: true
---

# Git Refs

Git is a version control tool used for developing and maintaining software projects. Generally speaking developers today will know the basics of how to use some form of svc in a practical scenario, but when diving into the actual details of how these tools work we usually haven't the foggiest. If it works; it works.

I definitely found myself in this category, despite being someone who some people would go to for getting git to do what they needed at my past companies. This blog post, and future ones on this topic are little notes on my process of removing this mindset, and instead trying to understand what git is doing behind the scenes. At the time of posting this I've already done a lot of my learning on git, but say I were to take a break from software development (i.e. travel the world for 6 months), this is a good reference point to remind myself.

## ref

Git **refs** are named, human readable pointers to a git commit ID. Some examples of **refs** include **branches** such as `master` and `dev`, as well as git **tags** such as `v2_successful_build` and `release1`. Refs can even point to other refs; an example of this is creating a git **tag** against a branch **ref**, where the tag will resolve to the commit ID for the branch **ref**. A list of these refs can be seen in `.git/refs/`.

## head

When the **ref** is a branch name, it points to the most recent commit ID of the branch (known as the tip). A git **head** is the **ref** that points to the tip of a branch. Because of this, the branch name ref is always kept in sync with the latest commit ID for that branch by referring to the head. A list of heads can been seen in `.git/refs/heads`.

## HEAD

**HEAD** points to the commit ID that you are currently working on. It's essentially an environment variable kept inside the repository which changes when moving around **refs**. It is stored in `.git/HEAD`. An example of this would be:

```
> git checkout dev
Switched to branch 'dev'
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/dev'.

> cat .git/HEAD
ref: refs/heads/dev
```

### Detached HEAD?

All this means is your currently checked out commit ID is behind the commit ID pointed to by the **head** of your current branch. An example of how this could happen would be:

```
> git log --oneline
367f155 (HEAD -> master, origin/master, origin/HEAD) Do something cool.
32e5fd6 Do something sweet.
946abcb Do something special.

> git checkout 32e5fd6
Note: switching to '32e5fd6'.

You are in 'detached HEAD' state. You can look around, make experimental
changes and commit them, and you can discard any commits you make in this
state without impacting any branches by switching back to a branch.

HEAD is now at 32e5fd6 Do something sweet.
```

[What is Git HEAD?](https://initialcommit.com/blog/what-is-git-head)