---
layout: post
title: Git Tag
tags: git
comments: true
---

# Git Tag

Git tagging is a useful way to mark specific points in a repository's commit history. There are plenty of useful reasons for doing this, whether it be for versioning or noting a specific point in time when software was of proven quality.

## Listing Tags

To list git tags type `git tag` which will display a list of all tags in your repository.

To add to this, add `-l` or `--list` in the form of `git tag -l "pattern"` to search for all git tags matching that pattern.

## Tagging

There are two types of tags in git: `lightweight` and `annotated`. **Lightweight** tags are primarily used for temporary tagging as they contain little information. **Annotated** tags on the other hand can be given a name, email, and date; have a tagging message; are checksummed, and can be signed and verified with GNU Privacy Guard (GPG)[^1].  

## Annotated Tags

To create an annotated tag you must specify the `-a` option. You can also add a message to this tag by specifying the `-m` option.

`git tag -a v1.4 -m "my version 1.4"`

To show this tag you can the specify the name of the annotated tag like

`git show v1.4`

## Lightweight Tags

To create a lightweight tag you provide no options to `git tag v1.4`. You can still run `git show v1.4` but the contents returned contain much less information.

## Tagging Previous commits

You can also tag previous commits using git tag. If you run `git log --oneline` you are provided a list of commit IDs. Using this commit ID you can run the command `git tag -a v1.3 -m "Tag back commit" commitID` to tag the previous commit.

## Deleting Tags

To delete tags form your local repository you can run `git tag -d v1.4`.

## Working with Tags and Remote

By default, local tags are not pushed, or removed to the remote repository via `git push`. To push tags you must run `git push origin`, with the addition of `--tags` or the tag name i.e. `v1.4`. And to delete; `git push origin --delete v1.4`. By default, git will reject any tag names that already exist in the repository, fortunately you can specify `-f` to any of these options (including remote operations) to force these to be overwritten.

[^1][Git Basics - Tagging](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging)



